README.md, before:

# AWS quick remote access EC2 instance setup with Terraform

A Terraform configuration to quickly spin up an AWS EC2 VM with SSH/RDP over-the-internet access. Ideal for temporary use cases like development or testing. Highly discouraged in production environments due to remote access ports being exposed by firewall directly to the internet.

## Prerequisites

- [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli) installed
- AWS account with [IAM credentials](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OZsmKaIz_M0)
- OpenSSH client installed
- (Optionally - if you want to deploy a Windows VM) RDP client

***

## Setup Instructions

1. **Prepare Your Environment**

2. **Clone this repository** ```git clone https://github.com/dyagami/terraform_quick_ec2.git```
  
3. **Create an IAM user and generate an Access Key with the following permissions:**
    - `AmazonEC2FullAccess`
    - `IAMReadOnlyAccess` (for Terraform to read IAM resources)

4. **Configure Variables**

   - **Preferrable way:**

        Set up the following environment variables prior to launching the code:

        ```
        TF_VAR_aws_access_key    = "YOUR_ACCESS_KEY"
        TF_VAR_aws_secret_key    = "YOUR_SECRET_KEY"
        TF_VAR_aws_region        = "YOUR_REGION"        
        TF_VAR_aws_ami           = "AMI_IMAGE_ID"
        TF_VAR_aws_instance_type = "INSTANCE_TYPE"
        ```

        Example:

        ```
        TF_VAR_aws_access_key    = "XYZ"
        TF_VAR_aws_secret_key    = "XYZ"
        TF_VAR_aws_region        = "eu-north-1"        
        TF_VAR_aws_ami           = "ami-0f62af003039dfaa6"
        TF_VAR_aws_instance_type = "t3.micro"
        ```

   - **Unsecure way (storing secrets in plaintext - only do it if you know the repercussions)**

        Edit `terraform.tfvars` file in your working directory with:

        ```
        aws_access_key    = "YOUR_ACCESS_KEY" 
        aws_secret_key    = "YOUR_SECRET_KEY"
        aws_region        = "YOUR_REGION"        
        aws_ami           = "AMI_IMAGE_ID"
        aws_instance_type = "INSTANCE_TYPE"
        ```

        Example:

        ```
        aws_access_key    = "XYZ" 
        aws_secret_key    = "XYZ"
        aws_region        = "eu-north-1"        
        aws_ami           = "ami-068011ee7bf544493"
        aws_instance_type = "t3.micro"
        ```

5. **Generate RSA key pair**

    `ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 -m PEM -N "" -f admin_key`

    This command generates an *SSH RSA 4096 bit key pair in PEM format* in the project's directory using filename "admin_key" with no password on the private key. The local files with keys will be used by Terraform to deploy a public key resource in AWS and authorize this keypair to connect to the server via SSH or, in case of Windows instances, the private key will be used to decrypt the Administrator account password generated by AWS that can be used to connect to the instance via RDP.

    The Administrator password will also be displayed by Terraform after deployment along with the newly assigned public IP to conveniently copy it if you choose to create a Windows VM. For a Linux VM, only the public IP for SSH use will be displayed, as there's no RDP server being hosted on Linux instances by default.

6. **Run Terraform Commands**

    ```
    terraform init
    terraform plan

    (...)

    # Changes to Outputs:
    #  + ami_link           = "https://eu-north-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=eu-north-1#ImageDetails:imageId=ami-068011ee7bf544493"
    #  + image_ami_id       = "ami-068011ee7bf544493"
    #  + image_name         = "ubuntu/images-testing/hvm-ssd-gp3/ubuntu-questing-daily-amd64-server-20250601"
    #  + instance_public_ip = (known after apply)
    ```

    Terraform will output the ami image ID and name along with a direct link to the AMI image in AWS catalog aligned to your specified region for a quick double-check of the image before applying the infrastructure.

    `terraform apply`

7. **Connect to the newly created VM instance**

    - If you deployed a Linux machine

        After obtaining the public IP you can connect to the instance by using `ssh -i ./admin_key USER@INSTANCE_IP`. The default SSH usernames for different Linux distributions deployed in AWS can be found [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/managing-users.html#ami-default-user-names).

    - If you deployed a Windows machine

        After obtaining the public IP and the Administrator password, you can enter them in your RDP client of choice, logging in as "Administrator" to a default domain "WORKGROUP".

        Example using Linux and xfreerdp3:
        `xfreerdp3 /u:Administrator /d:"WORKGROUP" /v:"IP_ADDRESS" /p:"PASSWORD"`

### If you are done using the EC2

    `terraform destroy`

Commit message:

add instance type details to outputs

README.md, after:

# AWS quick remote access EC2 instance setup with Terraform

A Terraform configuration to quickly spin up an AWS EC2 VM with SSH/RDP over-the-internet access. Ideal for temporary use cases like development or testing. Highly discouraged in production environments due to remote access ports being exposed by firewall directly to the internet.

## Prerequisites

- [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli) installed
- AWS account with [IAM credentials](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OZsmKaIz_M0)
- OpenSSH client installed
- (Optionally - if you want to deploy a Windows VM) RDP client

***

## Setup Instructions

1. **Prepare Your Environment**

2. **Clone this repository** ```git clone https://github.com/dyagami/terraform_quick_ec2.git```
  
3. **Create an IAM user and generate an Access Key with the following permissions:**
    - `AmazonEC2FullAccess`
    - `IAMReadOnlyAccess` (for Terraform to read IAM resources)

4. **Configure Variables**

   - **Preferrable way:**

        Set up the following environment variables prior to launching the code:

        ```
        TF_VAR_aws_access_key    = "YOUR_ACCESS_KEY"
        TF_VAR_aws_secret_key    = "YOUR_SECRET_KEY"
        TF_VAR_aws_region        = "YOUR_REGION"        
        TF_VAR_aws_ami           = "AMI_IMAGE_ID"
        TF_VAR_aws_instance_type = "INSTANCE_TYPE"
        ```

        Example:

        ```
        TF_VAR_aws_access_key    = "XYZ"
        TF_VAR_aws_secret_key    = "XYZ"
        TF_VAR_aws_region        = "eu-north-1"        
        TF_VAR_aws_ami           = "ami-0f62af003039dfaa6"
        TF_VAR_aws_instance_type = "t3.micro"
        ```

   - **Unsecure way (storing secrets in plaintext - only do it if you know the repercussions)**

        Edit `terraform.tfvars` file in your working directory with:

        ```
        aws_access_key    = "YOUR_ACCESS_KEY" 
        aws_secret_key    = "YOUR_SECRET_KEY"
        aws_region        = "YOUR_REGION"        
        aws_ami           = "AMI_IMAGE_ID"
        aws_instance_type = "INSTANCE_TYPE"
        ```

        Example:

        ```
        aws_access_key    = "XYZ" 
        aws_secret_key    = "XYZ"
        aws_region        = "eu-north-1"        
        aws_ami           = "ami-068011ee7bf544493"
        aws_instance_type = "t3.micro"
        ```

5. **Generate RSA key pair**

    `ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 -m PEM -N "" -f admin_key`

    This command generates an *SSH RSA 4096 bit key pair in PEM format* in the project's directory using filename "admin_key" with no password on the private key. The local files with keys will be used by Terraform to deploy a public key resource in AWS and authorize this keypair to connect to the server via SSH or, in case of Windows instances, the private key will be used to decrypt the Administrator account password generated by AWS that can be used to connect to the instance via RDP.

    The Administrator password will also be displayed by Terraform after deployment along with the newly assigned public IP to conveniently copy it if you choose to create a Windows VM. For a Linux VM, only the public IP for SSH use will be displayed, as there's no RDP server being hosted on Linux instances by default.

6. **Run Terraform Commands**

    ```
    terraform init
    terraform plan

    (...)

    + ami_link                       = "https://eu-north-1.console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home?region=eu-north-1#ImageDetails:imageId=ami-068011ee7bf544493"
    + image_ami_id                   = "ami-068011ee7bf544493"
    + image_name                     = "ubuntu/images-testing/hvm-ssd-gp3/ubuntu-questing-daily-amd64-server-20250601"
    + instance_public_ip             = (known after apply)
    + instance_type_details          = {
        + "Free Tier Eligible"       = "true"
        + "Network Card Performance" = "Up to 5 Gigabit"
        + "Selected Instance Type"   = "t3.micro"
        + "Total RAM (MiB)"          = "1024"
        + "Total Storage (GB)"       = "Not specified"
        + "vCPU Cores"               = "2"
        }
    + windows_administrator_password = (known after apply)    
    ```

    Terraform will output the ami image ID and name along with a direct link to the AMI image in AWS catalog aligned to your specified region for a quick double-check of the image before applying the infrastructure. The details of the instance type, including vCPUs, RAM, storage, network card interface speed and instance eligibility for the free plan will also be displayed, if known.

    `terraform apply`

7. **Connect to the newly created VM instance**

    - If you deployed a Linux machine

        After obtaining the public IP you can connect to the instance by using `ssh -i ./admin_key USER@INSTANCE_IP`. The default SSH usernames for different Linux distributions deployed in AWS can be found [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/managing-users.html#ami-default-user-names).

    - If you deployed a Windows machine

        After obtaining the public IP and the Administrator password, you can enter them in your RDP client of choice, logging in as "Administrator" to a default domain "WORKGROUP".

        Example using Linux and xfreerdp3:
        `xfreerdp3 /u:Administrator /d:"WORKGROUP" /v:"IP_ADDRESS" /p:"PASSWORD"`

### If you are done using the EC2

    `terraform destroy`
